First, if Wendy is online. Oh, I can see
Josie.
Hi.
You've got the right last name, so it looks good.
Yes. Yeah. So Wendy is joining us for the second
half. She's got a bit of-
Oh, I see
... a migraine.
Yeah. I see. Well, look, we'll get straight into it. You've got 10 minutes.
You might like to leave some time for questions.
I'll let you know when there's about a minute to run, but otherwise, the time is
all yours.
Cool. Thank you so much, and thanks to everyone for listening.
This is obviously an important issue for New Zealand, so we're
really grateful for the chance to speak.
So thank you so much for your time.
Secondly, as context, the institute is a nonpartisan think
tank, so we've got a focus on strategy, governance,
and helping develop long-term policy in New Zealand.
So our submission, we don't have the detail of working in the field like
other people you're going to hear from.
We're more hoping to help with some policy ideas, helping
to identify sort of risks and opportunities
in this area. So I'm just going to
briefly talk about the institute's submission, and then Wendy is talking
about some of our current work. And then we'll have time for
questions, and you guys can continue on with your busy day
ahead.
So our submission focuses on looking at current shortfalls and
future opportunities, looking at improving governance
arrangements and helping clearly define responsibilities,
life cycle asset management and value for money,
improving data quality and decision-making,
emissions reduction and the increased need for resources with climate
change,
helping integrate flexibility for in such an uncertain world
so that the whole system can adapt quickly as things change,
including investing in technology, and responding
to geopolitical events. And then lastly,
accountability to Parliament and the public.
So some key sort of concepts and recommendations.
The first one is that we're operating in a really unpredictable
environment, and so this
whole emergency response sector requires
an uncertainty mindset.
We need to be super flexible, constantly adapt to what's happening in the
world, geopolitical pressures,
war, extreme weather events. There's also the wider
context of the changing climate here and all those pressures.
So there's a lot of pressure on our emergency sector, as you're all well
aware.
And the institute's a bit concerned about the public sector's
reliance on the Defense Force to respond to domestic
emergencies.
For example, during the pandemic.
So it's sort of this dependent risks shifting them away from
their core role of defense.
Which unfortunately, in this uncertain world, we do need a
strong effort on defense as well.
So key recommendations include,
recommend the committee consider how to improve governance oversight and
accountability. Key things include role clarity,
decision transparency, strategy, parliamentary
visibility.
Secondly is looking at how we can improve data quality metrics and
decision-making.
So that includes helping support Fire and Emergency New Zealand
to improve data quality.
Next is monitor, evaluate, and require regular feedback
loops to ensure that this whole system remains fit for
purpose, which is why this is such a great thing to be doing.
The next one is looking at climate impacts and transition
strategies,
and requiring a strategy to be produced for emergencies in New
Zealand. So we recommend this is done regularly,
say every five years.
Invest in technology. So we've got this whole changing
world with AI, that might really change the whole
system, so it's being adaptable to that.
And now I'm quickly going to pass over to Wendy, who will
explain some of the institute's recent work that might be useful.
So thank you very much.
Thank you, everybody. Hopefully you can hear me.
Yes.
Okay, great. I wanted to
speak, so thank you very much for creating this opportunity.
The area that you're exploring is
obviously both very important and very urgent.
The urgent issue is not actually something I feel I can talk to
in a lot of detail, but the important issue is
absolutely clear to me. We've just
finished, in fact, I haven't published it yet, but we will publish it
today, is a piece we actually looked at global defense strategies,
and we looked around the world at 12 of them and compared New Zealand's.
Now New Zealand's actually ranked quite low,
not surprisingly for a whole lot of reasons, but not because of
money, and this is the important thing alone, not money alone.
We don't run a very integrated shop, if you like, in terms
of crises and emergencies in New Zealand, and
that was sort of quite a shocking finding.
So
what other countries are doing is they're integrating their crisis
and emergency management in with defense
in terms of, because we are always going to, we talk
about first responders. There's really a first responder, second responder, and
third responder in New Zealand. We have our
voluntary team. We have
ourOur police and then we go
to our defense team. So what I'm suggesting to you is you actually
think about ways that you can integrate and
perhaps
curate and actually, basically, this
massive funding that's gone to defense, maybe this is actually
something that could actually be explored in terms of funding the fleet.
Because perhaps the fleet could be multipurpose.
And maybe we could actually be thinking more strategically
around satellites and drones, and actually thinking
about systems that are being developed around the world, like in
Canada and in Australia at present.
So I feel that we are traditional in our way of
thinking in terms of public policy, and there's been a real
shift globally to an integrated,
whole of society, emergency and risk and defense
strategy. And we are miles away from that.
And I'm sort of hoping that might be something that the inquiry will, we would look
at.
So that covers all my points that I wanted to add, and I think we're now
open to questions. Thank you.
Thank you. And we have got three minutes, so let's see how we go.
We'll start with Andy Foster.
Yeah. Look, thanks, thanks for the submission.
I'm just wondering, you mentioned a couple of things in your submission.
One of them is about insurance retreat, and I just wondered if you had any
observations. I know that we're talking about
vehicles, but with your forbearance, Tim, given that it's in the submission,
insurance retreat. Do you have any observations about the way in which
the fire service is funded? And I particularly think vis-a-vis
police and ambulance, which are funded in completely different ways.
I.e. the property levy versus something more central.
Either I can't see it or Josie.
I, I can-
Yeah, you go, Josie
... I can have a go. I think,
like it sort of said in our submission, it does need a bit more
strategic thinking for the long term because the current system,
well, it's arguable whether it has worked in the past.
I think it'll be good to talk to some people in the industry to get their
perspective.
But having a long-term approach looking into the
future, is what's worked in the past in terms of those insurance levies
going to continue to work? I'm not super confident
that it is, especially because
another point in our
submission is we're going to need to invest more.
These emergency responses need more resourcing.
Yeah. And that's probably outside the scope, but a fair
question. So Lamanga Lydia Sosene.
Thank you. Thanks, Chair. Thank you to you both. Appreciate your submission.
My question is around data quality.
There's a lot of data that's been presented by not defense and the fire
service and NZFPU, but there's a lot of data.
How can we stream that line better?
You've made some strong suggestions,
and I just wanted to ask you both because you've both made comments in that area.
Do you want to go, Wendy, or me to?
Look, intelligence and because I've been doing all this defense
work at the moment, but intelligence is just so critical.
And I think that, actually, I was
an accountant, so I was always looking for perfect
data, but now I'm actually thinking in terms of intelligent data.
Getting something is better than nothing.
And so I think going back to this
concept of integrated systems, which goes back to the earlier question
by Andy, is the importance of trying to develop
integrated funding, integrated understanding of what success looks like and
integrated measurement. So it's a good question.
Thank you.
And we've got about 30 seconds, Dan Rose 1.
Yeah. Thanks, Chair. Just quickly, I'm just interested in
whether you see fire and emergencies fleet being managed as
a fully integrated system, like linking procurement, maintenance, and supply
chains, or whether those elements are still being treated in
silos. Because it appears to me that
life cycle planning has been overridden by
short-term funding pressures. Would that be correct?
Absolutely. And
it's not a situation just happening in this
area, but it is clearly a real problem for us
when we try and deal with a crisis or emergency.
There's a number of different players.
And I know people are working at integrated ways, but we don't have much
money. The issues are going to get much more complex.
We're going to need, going back to your intelligence data, we need more.
We need better systems.
That's why I love satellites and the concept of drones, because your
ability to actually see what's happening is going to be critically
important.
Absolutely. And you need a lot of people in the back office to really kind of make
this work too, don't you?
Yes, absolutely.
And we are sadly out of time there. But really appreciate your thorough
submission.
Thanks for your time. We are going to move now to Hamilton.
Thank you.
And we've got the local Hamilton PFU
team.
Welcome.
Kia ora, Tim. Can you hear me okay?
Yep. Go for it. And you guys have got
10 minutes for your submission as well, so I'll let you know when there's one to
go, but you might like to leave time for questions.
Okay, perfect. Yeah. Thank you very much,
Chair, members of the committee,
for the opportunity to appear today on behalf of the Hamilton Local.
So my name is Jay Culhane. I'm a senior firefighter in Hamilton
for 12 years.
And I'm also the Hamilton local secretary for the
NZPFU.Yeah.
So I'm appearing today to support the written submissions already
provided to you and,
I guess, bring that operational voice
for Hamilton's perspective on the current state of the fire and emergency
fleet.
The key message I want to bring to the committee to take
away today is the current state of Defence fleet is
reducing operational capability and increasing the risk to
firefighters and the public.
This is certainly not a future risk. It's happening right now.
And what's particularly concerning is the consistency of the evidence.
The committee has received submissions from different stations in Hamilton,
different watches regarding different appliance
types and different specialist functions across
Hamilton area.
Yet despite being prepared independently, they all are identifying
the same issues.
Aging appliances, repeated mechanical failures,
loss of specialist capability,
lack of relief appliances
and delayed replacement programs,
and an increasing reliance on operational workarounds to maintain service
delivery.
Hamilton's certainly one of the busiest and fastest growing fire districts in New
Zealand.
However, fleet capability has not kept pace with that growth.
Many frontline and specialist appliances are now operating well beyond their
intended service life.
Some are approaching or exceeding 30 years of age.
In a modern emergency service, this should be the exception.
Instead, it has become pretty normal
and the consequences are visible every day.
Crews experiencing recurring air leaks, cooling system
failures, transmission faults, pump issues, and electrical
problems.
Appliances spend increasing amount of time in workshops,
and faults that should be isolated incidents become recurring operational issues.
In some cases, crews have experienced appliances failing during
incidents or becoming unavailable with little warning.
And the issue is
not simply that the vehicles are old, the issue is that the fleet replacement has
not kept pace with operational demand.
When replacement cycles are delayed, older appliances remain in frontline
service longer than intended.
The result is increasing maintenance costs, declining reliability, and
growing operational risk.
One area of particular concern is specialist capability,
namely our aerial.
Hamilton's aerial appliance is approximately 30 years old,
and Hamilton is currently still without aerial capability.
And that's coming up on 75 days, I think,
extended period that
the appliance is undergoing extensive
repairs. And the usual relief
appliance is also unavailable, so we've got no aerial
coverage in Hamilton.
As a result, a major and rapidly growing urban center
is left without coverage, and then we're drawing on Auckland to
come down who are also
relatively short.
At the same time, there remains no aerial strategy or national
aerial strategy despite recommendations arising from the
Auckland International Convention Centre fire in 2019, I believe.
Without this clear strategy, decisions around replacement,
placement and future capability become reactive rather than
planned.
The same issue exists across other specialist functions.
When these specialist appliances break down or go in for servicing, there is
often no equivalent replacement available,
so capability is reduced or lost entirely.
In some cases, crews are forced to transfer equipment to other vehicles that were
never designed to carry it.
In other cases, there is simply no replacement capability available.
Another issue identified consistently throughout the submissions is the
absence of a modern fleet management system.
Operational personnel can identify recurring faults.
We see the patterns. We can identify appliances that repeatedly
suffer the same failures,
yet there is no national fault reporting or tracking system that allows frontline
personnel to see fault histories, monitor progress of repairs, or
identify these reoccurring trends.
So this limits accountability and reduces the organization's ability to
undertake proactive maintenance.
Instead, many of the issues are managed reactively after they have already affected
operations.
Operational consequence of this is significant.
Increasingly, officers are making tactical decisions based on resource
limitations rather than preferred operational tactics.
Cross-crewing further compounds the problem.
While multiple appliances may appear available on paper,
the deployment of one appliance can remove access to
several others.
The result is that actual operational capability is often lower than it appears.
For firefighters, this means working with
equipment they have less confidence in.
For officers, it means adapting plans around known
capability gaps.
For the public, it means an increased risk of delayed response,
delayed rescue, and reduced specialist capability when it
is needed mostThe written
submission contains a number of recommendations, but
I just want to highlight five priorities.
The first one is conducting a comprehensive and
transparent national fleet audit.
Second, establishing a funded long-term fleet replacement program
aligned with operational demand.
Third, develop and implement a national aerial and specialist
capability strategy, which I do believe that is in the
pipeline.
Fourth, introduce a national fault reporting and asset management
system that provides visibility and accountability.
And finally, ensure operational personnel are involved in procurement,
design, and acceptance testing processes.
In closing, I would like to emphasize that the submissions before the committee are
not complaints about individual vehicles.
They're evidence of systemic issues.
The consistency of concerns
raised independently by multiple stations, crews, and specialist
functions
suggest these are not isolated operational issues.
Frontline firefighters will continue to respond and continue to make the system
work. The question for the committee is whether the current fleet system is
providing them with the capability, reliability, and support
required to do that safely and effectively.
Yeah, thanks for your time, and happy to take any questions.
Thanks. We have got a couple of minutes. Can I just ask a quick one?
You talked in your submission about relief.
Is it that you don't have relief appliances up there,
or are you just saying that there is inconsistencies with how they're
allocated or how they're used? Can you just help me understand what the-
With our aerial, we don't have a relief appliance located in
Hamilton.
Historically, that's always come down from Auckland.
Auckland, yeah.
That one
is currently and has been unavailable for over a year, I
believe. The-
Okay. Is there relief-
... it's been labeled
... for a type 3?
Yes, there is.
We have a relief appliance in Hamilton, so.
And just if I can quickly and then I'm going to go to Mike
Davidson. You've
given us and the different stations have given us a pretty thorough list of faults
and issues with vehicles. But just talk to us about the
replacement
strategy if there is one. Is it just that new trucks aren't coming through?
They're not going to the right places?
Give us your local experience on the ground then.
I think, in Hamilton, there is light at the end of our tunnel.
We've just received one of the
trial trucks, the
Anglo Scania.
So we've got a new appliance in Hamilton, but
it's just taken too long to get here.
We're
still needing our frontline
appliances out of Charlwood Station and Torapa Station to be
cascaded,
and our aerial is,
like I said, near 30 years old and currently isn't
in service. It's been out of service for 75 days, so.
Yeah. Thank you. Mike Davidson.
Thanks, Tim. Thanks for your submission, Jay.
You've obviously outlined the issues and solutions, and I've got a
couple of questions, I guess. Is like,
you've been there since the formation of FENZ. It's nearly 10 years old.
Why do you think we've actually got to this point that we're having to have an
inquiry to try and address this issue?
And the second part would be, do you see the main issue of
FENZ is the fleet, or is fleet a symptom of a wider issue
within FENZ?
I think to answer your second question first, I think it's a symptom of wider
issues.
And I guess I can't speak to what went on when
we amalgamated with all the different firefighting bodies and
became foreign emergency.
But I think maybe we were underprovisioned
or priorities were...
I guess they were bringing other stations up to speed, the
rural service.
Yeah, I think we've been lost in the matrix a
little bit. The
operational fleet for
the red fleet.
Okay, thanks.
Thanks. Slightly over time, but appreciate you staying with us.
It's really, really valuable hearing your experience.
We are going to move on now to Clark Townsley.
Thanks for joining us, Clark. There's five minutes, but
feel free if you want to leave time for questions.
We've all got your written submissions in front of us, so it's all yours.
Thanks for that. Thanks for letting me come on this morning.
Yeah, I'll just do a bit of a quick intro on myself, and
you've obviously read the submission, so we won't go over that too
much. But
yeah, SSO reliever between Thorndon and Newtown
stations. I'm also the local
union president for Wellington,
also the lead SME and the national NZP if you
rep for HAZMAT.
And HAZMAT kind of makes the aerial
situation look like a good news story.
So it's another facet of the organization that's kind
of not working so well. Also, for reference, I was also the
first arriving officer at the Loafers Lodge fire.
I subsequently refused a citation with personal feelings of the
appropriateness of the timing of the award
and the issues that we faced at the incident, i.e., having to put in
alternative tactics primarily around sort of like
theLack of aerials and a few other things that were
spoken to by the submitters.
Also, with context to the fleet,
from around about 2016 onwards, I was part of the
local and national,
NZPFU,
the MAN remediation project
that had to
be put into place because of the amount of problems that we had when
they were first introduced. For instance, we had about
1,400 faults alone in Wellington.
I think there was over 1,000 in Christchurch, and I think even more than that
in Auckland. So we actually took that evidence into the meetings and we got some
work done there. So it does work when you record those issues.
After that, I got roped into being the
NZPFU rep for the new Type 3 procurement project,
primarily around getting the process for consultation
correct so they would actually get a fit for purpose vehicle.
And as Terry Bird said, eight years later, we're still
going with this. So it's been a long time.
What else have we got in there? Yeah, so other things we've done locally that
we, because of the lack of the fault reporting system and the amount of faults that
we do have in aerials, and they've all been well-publicated
with failures, with firefighters getting burnt in cages at fires, we ended
up starting our own local area
fault reporting for our particularly dodgy
fleet. So it happened at both as the truck
wasn't available for over 500 days, so we started recording well
before then all the issues that we had.
So we put one on ourselves in that
vacuum.
Also,
just as a bit of context of what I
brought to the organization was I had seven years in the marine and aviation
safety
business before we came into the fire brigade.
So, yeah, that's me.
You've got my submissions. I'm open to any questions.
Thanks. I'm going to start with, in a second, Lemanga Ledia Sosene,
but can I just confirm, one of your submissions you have submitted on behalf of
Thornleigh Fire Station. So are you here on behalf of
them or just as an individual? Because if you're on behalf of them, we can give you
a bit longer.
Yeah. I'm on behalf of the Thornleigh Fire Station.
Good answer.
Lemanga Ledia Sosene.
Well, thanks, Chair, and thanks, Clark, for your submissions.
It's really helpful. I have two quick questions.
My first question is,
how critical has that been in terms of your reporting system?
So you started just doing it off your own back in terms of the faults.
Yeah.
And you've kept a really clear record.
My second question is regards to Loafers Lodge in terms of the aerials.
I know that there's been some real issues there.
Can you just elaborate a little bit further about the aerials and how critical they
are in your operations?
So the aerials,
now a couple of things. If you go right back to the base of it, they're not taught
in any of our officer training. It's all basically like Alan Collett said in his
one, that everything's learnt by osmosis.
So if you go right back to the very beginning,
you really do pick the stuff up by osmosis.
You are literally learning on the job as you get it.
So the training for using these is very substandard.
When you're actually using them for an actual job, they
can be varied for everything. We can use them for obviously
your rescues, which was one of the primary reasons why I
really... It was a bit of a trigger for me when I was looking at the video
post Loafers Lodge, where the guy could've been easily rescued if
we had that particular machine. Now, it was gone for over 500 days,
which is an obscene amount of time to not have a second
truck in the capital city of New Zealand.
So you use them for all kinds of things.
So we put them in, but another tactic that we could've potentially used at other
incidents is when we don't have them is that they provide a
external
water supply to go into buildings.
So if you were just say like we had in that fire that I think Kurt Walsh referred
to, I was the OIC of that,
and we had no way of getting the water up to the ninth floor.
You can use them as an external riser.
So tactically, they're an extremely valuable piece
of equipment, particularly around the high rise
scene. But now that we're seeing buildings around the country with
big storage areas like Hamilton's and Christchurch, the
longer the trucks are, as in the height of them,
they actually go more in for about the reach so that you go in and over the
top of these large facilities. We don't have them.
There's only one 45-meter ladder that's been ordered,
which is still sitting in the workshop. It's being worked on.
So at the moment, we're still just running 32 meters around the entire
country. So is there anything else you want me to add to that?
As in, like, any-
No, that's good.
We might keep charging through the questions if we can so everyone gets in.
Dan Rosewarne.
Yeah. Thanks, Chair. Going through these submissions, I'm surprised that
there's no national fault reporting system, which is a
huge management flaw. That's fundamental to proactive
maintenance as it allows you to forecast the parts you need and make sure that
they're on the shelf when you need them.
Without that visibility, how do you prioritize repairs
or replacements effectively, or is it just kind of on the
day?
This is a really good question, and I'm not the national fleet manager, so I
can't tell you what the financial impacts are on them.
But you can only surmise that it can't be particularly good for them to actually
have no record of what that's, if there's systematic
flaws with a particular vehicle type
or how do you get that history behind it?
The only way to do it is actually by using the invoicing, if that's all you've got
leftNow, is that ideal? No. I think you
don't really want to be at the ambulance at the bottom of the cliff.
You want to be that FENZ at the top. So if you start seeing all of
these problems arising, you would think the fault reporting would
capture that early-
Mm
... and you would make it transparent, and then therefore you could sort of
cut it off at the pass before it becomes an issue.
Just things like the intercoolers and a few other bits and pieces that we have.
So yeah, super important.
I've been arguing that as the NZP for Uret since about
2014. So yeah. What's that now? So that's 12
years.
Thank you. Andy Foster.
Thanks,
Clark.
Sort of integrated questions here.
Just the state of play, you just mentioned 2014, but the state of
play of the fleet between 2017, as it was when FENZ was first set
up to 2026, how that's changed. And I'm also interested in
the issue around age versus faults.
Obviously, we've got an aging fleet, but also whether a faults happen,
how related are they to age, or are they happening all the way through the
fleet, even the newer parts of the fleet?
And then the capturing of those faults, because what we have
heard is that essentially there is no national,
or
digital way of capturing those, so it sounds very manual.
So really keen to understand all of those.
Yeah. So like I say, when we go right back to the beginning of all of
this,
ever since I started, which was around about 2001, everything was kept in
a logbook. And what it did was basically it sat inside
the driver's side door. You filled it in.
If it was really bad, you would ring up the area commander and say, "Hey, look,
this truck's broken. We need to get a replacement." That's how it was done,
and it hasn't changed since then. There was nothing in place.
Now I know that Palmerston North, they've got an electronic version that they've
done locally that they're kind of playing around with. We've seen it.
It looks like it's pretty good. But every time we try and punt
something to FENZ saying, "Look, we've got workarounds
from the floor." We've got some really intelligent people out there who are
program designers. With things like the overtime issue, we had
a program out there for that, they didn't adopt that.
There's things out there for the fleet recording. It's out there.
They don't want to adopt that. You're meeting absolute
resistance on everything that we're trying to suggest, and
it ends up being a false economy because there might be an initial capital outlay,
but after that it starts paying for itself.
So you're right, we're still stuck in the dark ages as far as
that with all the ICT gear. We've got all these people who are
our support people for ICT, and they're looking at
getting rid of all of those. So just as we're computerizing, modernizing
everything up, we're not there. We're going to get rid of all those support
systems. So I don't know what the future's going to be like in that space.
Okay. The other part of that question
you haven't answered was the bit about maintenance on the way through.
So we've got aging fleet, but you also got maintenance
as the fleet ages, so 10-year-old vehicles and so on. What's going on with those?
Well,
you have to take your hats off to our mechanics.
I think they need magic wands and pointy wizards hats, because
that's what it's going to take to make these things stay on the run.
It's just ridiculous. They're doing an amazing job just keeping the...
Any other outside agency or business would not
run a fleet of this age. It starts becoming,
obviously it's like everything when you have
deferred maintenance,
the cost of those replacements, the cost of the repairs just start
skyrocketing. So
sitting on trucks, the cascade system hasn't really worked properly since around
about 2016.
That's obviously going to have ramifications
downstream, and that's where we're kind of at at the moment.
So the trucks, it's like any machine, it just wears out.
That's just the fact.
Thank you. Thanks for your time. I think we've run out for me and Mike to have
questions now because we're well and truly over time.
But we're going to move to Palmerston North for our last submission, and I think
we've got Tony online. You can feel free to turn on your
camera. Great to see you with us.
There's 10 minutes for you guys. You might like to leave some time for
questions at the end. I'll let you know when there's a minute or so to run.
Can I just highlight that there's probably some interest in your,
we just heard from Clark about your fleet monitoring, and you've got your own
in-house system. So I'm sure we'd be interested to hear a little bit about that,
but
time is yours.
Cool. Chairperson, committee members, thank you for the opportunity to speak
today. I want to start by addressing a statistic recently provided to
you by DC Stifler, the claim that FENZ meets a
99.72% response rate.
On paper, that number looks outstanding. It looks like total coverage.
But as frontline staff, we're here to tell you that that percentage is a dangerous
abstraction.
That metric is massively diluted.
It lumps together every single type of vehicle in the country to inflate the
baseline, completely burying the data on our career pumps.
By drowning the numbers, FENZ avoids focusing on the type threes, which is
precisely where the systemic failures are occurring.
The statistic tells you that a red truck with flashing lights turned up.
It does not tell you which truck arrived, what capabilities it lacked, or how
long it actually took to get there. It hides a system running on fumes and luck.
The reality on the ground in Palmerston North, where our 22-year-old type
4 aerial breaks down, which happens often,
there is no equivalent replacement.
I say ours, but it's actually the national spare we have been stuck with for nearly
seven years because FENZ has nothing else.
If a type 4 suffers a terminal fault today, FENZ is at best seven years
away from a replacement strategy.
So what happens when it fails? We plug the hole with a 27-year-old
pumpTo satisfy the dispatch system, that old pump gets the aerial's
call sign of Palmerston North 214.
The system ticks a box, the statistic records a successful turnout, but in
reality, comms has a critical note attached, no ladder capability.
If a high-rise or commercial fire breaks out, our nearest cover is
Wanganui. We have even had occasions where both local
assets were offline simultaneously, leaving our aerial cover to come from
Wellington or New Plymouth.
This is not a network of cover. This is gambling with public safety.
FENZ suggests that we don't have the appropriate appliances.
If we don't have them, officers can simply deploy alternative strategies.
Let's be clear, those alternative strategies can be significantly more dangerous
and far less effective. They will inevitably result in greater property
loss and potential loss of life because we are forced to take unacceptable risks.
Whenever senior management is pressed on these failures, FENZ repeatedly relies on
the well-worn excuse, they state they simply inherited these fleet issues from the
New Zealand Fire Service.
But FENZ was formed nearly a decade ago.
How long can an organization use its predecessor as a shield,
especially when you look at who is running it?
Our current chief executive didn't just walk into this organization from the
outside. He has been here since he was fresh off a recruit course in
1990. They own this crisis.
FENZ has openly admitted during these committee hearings that their priority for
the last nine years has been rural, stating it was a government direction.
However, to put that into perspective, for Palmerston North
last year, vegetation fires accounted for only 4% of our
1,600 plus calls. While the rural sector absolutely
needed new trucks, it shouldn't have been at the expense of urban readiness.
Prior to this, it took them about 10 years just to reach the procurement phase of
the now faulty Type Threes. I know this firsthand.
I was a senior firefighter when the project started.
My boss, who is now retired, was on the original project.
FENZ moves at a glacial pace, routinely using transition as an excuse for
inertia, and there is no hope of them catching up without urgent, independent
intervention.
Our own station profile, we have exactly one truck under 10 years old for career
staff, and two of our trucks are well past their operational life under FENZ's
own policy.
We have two new Anglo-Man trucks coming.
What they fail to mention, however, is these trucks arrive with a fault sheet as
long as your arm.
One sits in our rear of a station today with all the pump sensors removed.
Furthermore, the older trucks that are displaced by this move will be cascaded down
to career and volunteer stations with lower call volumes, meaning those stations
are receiving fleet assets that are already outside of policy before they even roll
into the bay.
When Levin's 27-year-old truck breaks down, which is also a frequent
occurrence, the option is to deplete our own response capability from Palmerston
North or roll out the 1989 Scania which was brought back from the scrap
pile, and that is not an exaggeration.
To give you some political context, when that truck was built, David Lange was the
Prime Minister of New Zealand.
We are fighting 21st century fires with Cold War-era machinery.
Management claims these issues are hidden by IT failures and the lack of
fleet recording systems.
Four years ago, one of our own officers developed a Teams-based app to
accurately track truck faults. Over the last year, it has
spread, used by career and volunteer stations across Manawatu,
Wanganui, Wellington, and Hawke's Bay.
It even talks directly to the external service providers via a dedicated FENZ
user account.
It is incredibly successful, highly efficient, and was offered to FENZ
multiple times for $0. It has never been formally adopted,
possibly because of FENZ's own choking internal bureaucracy.
So, in all these hearings, where we debate the future of our fleet and the safety
of our communities, where is Sarah Sinclair, the DCE for asset and
program delivery?
Mm.
And where is Mike Moran, the national fleet manager?
It is time for real accountability before the statistics catch up with us in the
worst possible way.
I have always wondered why we constantly have to justify our existence and fight
for appropriate funding for a first-world fire service.
But seeing this systemic failure, I now realize exactly why we must answer to the
government. We have no transparency over where the money is actually going.
That's why we need a full, independent inquiry into FENZ as a whole.
Cheers.
Thank you. Can you just expand for us, your comment, I think it was
about your Type Four, and when-
Yeah
... that's broken down, you'll respond with, I assume, a
Type Three.
Yes.
But it will pick up a Type Four call sign just with a note that says, "No ladder."
And that gets recorded as a Type Four has responded.
Can you just-
Yes
... talk us through that bit in a bit more detail?
So because we have the North Island spare, and originally when the aerials came
out, as Clark mentioned, they would move a truck around if something had a terminal
fault and it took a long time to repair.
All we do is move a truck into that next bay and call it 214,
because otherwise it messes up all the dispatch data.
So if we need to respond an aerial, it will ping Wanganui.
It will call Wanganui, or it will call Wellington or something to say, "Hey,
Palmerston North needs a turnout for an aerial response."
So the pump records as 214 with no ladder
capability. So all the data that they're getting is 214 went to a
call, 214 went to a call. It was a pump, it wasn't an aerial.
And how often would that be happening?
Extremely often. We recently had
our MAN truck, which is the one that we only have that's about 10
years old,
that was in with a blown head gasket for three weeks.
And then our 212, which is 27 years old,
that had no dash lights, so we couldn't drive it at night.
We also had a time where Wanganui, Palmerston North,
New Plymouth, and Hawke's Bay, all their aerials were off at exactly the same
time. FENZ rang around to the service providers when we
highlighted it and said, "Get them back on station.
I don't care about the repairs."And they-
Right
... they wanted trucks back on the run to prove that they had cover, and they
didn't.
Thank you. Mike, did you have a question just before I go to the others?
No. Okay. We'll go to Limanga Lydia Sisene.
Thanks, Tony. Thanks for your submissions and your comments today.
It's really helpful to understand. Two quick questions.
The first question was your comment around how FENZ have
been focused on rural-
Mm-hmm
... ignoring urban, and the impacts of that, particularly around the
type threes. And the next question is your successful system of
recording. You just mentioned your comments around you've had it
going for four years, and it's recorded now a number of things, and now it's being
used by other firehouses. Can you just comment on that further?
Yep. So the fleet recording system was developed by
BJ Clark. He developed a Teams app,
and basically within that, it all sits
under fleet equipment, and people have their
different, I guess, stations and business units.
And now the mechanics actually have a FENZ user account,
so they can see directly what we're uploading as soon as we upload it.
Yeah. I can't say why it wasn't adopted.
It was offered multiple times.
And just on that-
Yep
... sorry, just really quickly.
You've talked about the mechanics and how they record it.
How important has it been to have that system with the notation, with the notes
in it, and that you've kept a good record of it because other firehouses are using
it? How critical has that been in terms of your planning on the ground?
I think it's vital. We get updates now a bit more as to where trucks
are and how long they're going to take to get back, although,
as Clark mentioned, that's kind of a wizard one.
That's a guesstimate a lot of the times because they're having to wait on parts
that are coming from overseas.
We regularly,
I think as Andy was saying, we juggle.
We don't know exactly how to prioritize what truck gets fixed and
when. It is absolute guesswork. We can have a truck going for
a cough, and we'll have to put that off because another truck is waiting on
repairs, and we have no actual backup.
We can't swap a truck out. We can't have three trucks away at the same
time. We're trying to cover a populace of 90,000 people,
plus service about 50 square kilometers around us with all the volunteer brigades,
and we can't keep up.
Thank you.
Thank you. I'll go to Mike Davidson now, just since he missed out last
time.
Just a really quick question, too.
Can I ask who you actually, who this recording system was
offered to?
I can't say 100%, but I know it was offered to at
least our region level.
Okay, thanks.
Dan Rosewarne.
Yeah. Thanks, Chair.
In your submission, you listed faults on brand new appliances
before they've even been accepted, which I find outrageous.
Yeah.
What does that say about the process for testing and accepting new
equipment before it even enters service?
Well, without union intervention coming into accepting these
trucks, FENZ was pushing to get them on the run.
But without our union members actually sitting there and going, "Hey, we actually
need to make sure these are ready and capable before you put them on the run,"
who knows what they would've turned up like.
It becomes a take this appliance, get it on the run,
we'll fix it as we progress through.
And we're saying, "No, we're not going to accept something that is substandard."
Thank you. And we are actually out of time there, but appreciate you joining us.
Have a great day in Palmy.
And I think we're going to move into private now, committee, so we'll
just step out of this Zoom room and into the other, and I'll see you all shortly.
Cheers.